Finetune guide for semantic segmentation (#18640)
huggingface/transformers: docs/source/en/tasks/semantic_segmentation.mdx

<!--Copyright 2022 The HuggingFace Team. All rights reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on
an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.
-->

# Semantic segmentation

<Youtube id="dKE8SIt9C-w"/>

> Semantic segmentation assigns a label or class to each individual pixel of an image. There are several types of segmentation tasks, and in the case of semantic segmentation, it doesn't differentiate between unique instances of the same object. Both objects are given the same label. Common real-world applications of semantic segmentation include training self-driving cars to identify pedestrians and important traffic information, identifying cells and abnormalities in medical imagery, and monitoring environmental changes from satellite imagery.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Semantic segmentation assigns a label or class to each individual pixel of an image. There are several types of segmentation, and in the case of semantic segmentation, one doesn't differentiate between unique instances of the same object. Both objects are given the same label (e.g. "car"). Common real-world applications of semantic segmentation include training self-driving cars to identify pedestrians and important traffic information, identifying cells and abnormalities in medical imagery, and monitoring environmental changes from satellite imagery.
```

> Semantic segmentation assigns a label or class to each individual pixel of an image. There are several types of segmentation, and in the case of semantic segmentation, it doesn't differentiate between unique instances of the same object. Both objects are given the same label (for example, "car" instead of "car-1" and "car-2"). Common real-world applications of semantic segmentation include training self-driving cars to identify pedestrians and important traffic information, identifying cells and abnormalities in medical imagery, and monitoring environmental changes from satellite imagery.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Semantic segmentation assigns a label or class to each individual pixel of an image. There are several types of segmentation, and in the case of semantic segmentation, no distinction is made between unique instances of the same object. Both objects are given the same label (for example, "car" instead of "car-1" and "car-2"). Common real-world applications of semantic segmentation include training self-driving cars to identify pedestrians and important traffic information, identifying cells and abnormalities in medical imagery, and monitoring environmental changes from satellite imagery.
```

<Tip>

See the image segmentation [task page](https://huggingface.co/tasks/image-segmentation) for more information about its associated models, datasets, and metrics.

</Tip>

Before you begin, make sure you have all the necessary libraries installed:

```bash
pip install -q datasets transformers evaluate
```

## Load SceneParse150 dataset

Load the first 50 examples of the SceneParse150 dataset from the 🤗 Datasets library so you can quickly train and test a model:

```py
>>> from datasets import load_dataset

>>> ds = load_dataset("scene_parse_150", split="train[:50]")
```

Split this dataset into a train and test set:

```py
>>> ds = ds.train_test_split(test_size=0.2)
>>> train_ds = ds["train"]
>>> test_ds = ds["test"]
```

Then take a look at an example:

```py
>>> train_ds[0]
{'image': <PIL.JpegImagePlugin.JpegImageFile image mode=RGB size=512x683 at 0x7F9B0C201F90>,
 'annotation': <PIL.PngImagePlugin.PngImageFile image mode=L size=512x683 at 0x7F9B0C201DD0>,
 'scene_category': 368}
```

> There is an `image`, an `annotation` (this is the segmentation map or label), and a `scene_category` field that describes the image scene like kitchen or office. Both `image` and `annotation` are PIL images.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is an `image`, an `annotation` (this is the segmentation map or label), and a `scene_category` field that describes the image scene, like "kitchen" or "office". We'll only need `image` and `annotation`, both are PIL images.
```

You'll also want to create a dictionary that maps a label id to a label class which will be useful when you set up the model later. Download the mappings from the Hub and create the `id2label` and `label2id` dictionaries:

```py
>>> import json
>>> from huggingface_hub import cached_download, hf_hub_url

>>> repo_id = "datasets/huggingface/label-files"
>>> filename = "ade20k-id2label.json"
>>> id2label = json.load(open(cached_download(hf_hub_url(repo_id, filename)), "r"))
>>> id2label = {int(k): v for k, v in id2label.items()}
>>> label2id = {v: k for k, v in id2label.items()}
```

## Preprocess

> Next, load a SegFormer feature extractor to process the image into an array of tensors. Some datasets, like this one, uses the zero-index as the background class. However, the background class isn't included in the 150 classes, so you'll need to set `reduce_labels=True` to subtract one from all the labels. The zero-index is replaced by `255` so it's ignored by SegFormer's loss function:

Reviewer: Note that we're currently in the process of replacing feature extractors by image processors, as feature extractor is a confusing name.

Author: Thanks for the heads up, I'll update this again once the image processors are ready

> Next, load a SegFormer feature extractor to process the image into an array of tensors. Some datasets, like this one, uses the zero-index as the background class. However, the background class isn't included in the 150 classes, so you'll need to set `reduce_labels=True` to subtract one from all the labels. The zero-index is replaced by `255` so it's ignored by SegFormer's loss function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, load a SegFormer feature extractor to process the image into an array of tensors. Some datasets, like this one, use the zero-index as the background class. However, the background class isn't included in the 150 classes, so you'll need to set `reduce_labels=True` to subtract one from all the labels. The zero-index is replaced by `255` so it's ignored by SegFormer's loss function:
```

> Next, load a SegFormer feature extractor to process the image into an array of tensors. Some datasets, like this one, uses the zero-index as the background class. However, the background class isn't included in the 150 classes, so you'll need to set `reduce_labels=True` to subtract one from all the labels. The zero-index is replaced by `255` so it's ignored by SegFormer's loss function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, load a SegFormer feature extractor, which can be used to prepare the images and annotations for the model. Some datasets, like this one, use the zero-index as the background class. However, the background class isn't included in the 150 classes, so you'll need to set `reduce_labels=True` to subtract one from all the labels. The zero-index is replaced by `255` so it's ignored by SegFormer's loss function:
```

```py
>>> from transformers import AutoFeatureExtractor

>>> feature_extractor = AutoFeatureExtractor.from_pretrained("nvidia/mit-b0", reduce_labels=True)
```

It is common to apply some data augmentations to an image dataset to make a model more robust against overfitting. In this guide, you'll use the [`ColorJitter`](https://pytorch.org/vision/stable/generated/torchvision.transforms.ColorJitter.html) function from [torchvision](https://pytorch.org/vision/stable/index.html) to randomly change the color properties of an image:

```py
>>> from torchvision.transforms import ColorJitter

>>> jitter = ColorJitter(brightness=0.25, contrast=0.25, saturation=0.25, hue=0.1)
```

> Now create a preprocessing function that'll apply the `jitter` transform and return the `pixel_values` and `labels` of an image. `pixel_values` is the expected model input and it is generated by the feature extractor. You should only `jitter` the images in the training set. For the `labels` and the test set, the feature extractor will only crop and normalize the `images` and `labels`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now let's create a preprocessing function that will apply the `jitter` transform and return the `pixel_values` and `labels` of an image. `pixel_values` is the expected model input and it is generated by the feature extractor. You should only `jitter` the images in the training set. For the `labels` and the test set, the feature extractor will only crop and normalize the `images` and `labels`.
```

Now create two preprocessing functions to prepare the images and annotations for the model. These functions convert the images into `pixel_values` and annotations to `labels`. For the training set, `jitter` is applied before providing the images to the feature extractor. For the test set, the feature extractor crops and normalizes the `images`, and only crops the `labels` because no data augmentation is applied during testing.

```py
>>> def train_transforms(example_batch):
...     images = [jitter(x) for x in example_batch["image"]]
...     labels = [x for x in example_batch["annotation"]]
...     inputs = feature_extractor(images, labels)
...     return inputs

>>> def val_transforms(example_batch):
...     images = [x for x in example_batch["image"]]
...     labels = [x for x in example_batch["annotation"]]
...     inputs = feature_extractor(images, labels)
...     return inputs
```

> To apply the `jitter` over the entire dataset, use 🤗 Datasets [`~datasets.Dataset.set_transform`] function. The transform is applied on the fly which is faster and consumes less disk space:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To apply the `jitter` over the entire dataset, use the 🤗 Datasets [`~datasets.Dataset.set_transform`] function. The transform is applied on the fly which is faster and consumes less disk space:
```

```py
>>> train_ds.set_transform(train_transforms)
>>> test_ds.set_transform(val_transforms)
```

## Train

<frameworkcontent>
<pt>

> Load SegFormer with [`AutoModelForSemanticSegmentation`], specify the number of labels, and pass the model the mapping between label ids and label classes:

Author: I think since we have a Tip below that links to the finetuning tutorial where this is explained, it's not necessary to add this clarification.

```py
>>> from transformers import AutoModelForSemanticSegmentation

>>> pretrained_model_name = "nvidia/mit-b0"
>>> model = AutoModelForSemanticSegmentation.from_pretrained(
...     pretrained_model_name, num_labels=num_labels, id2label=id2label, label2id=label2id

> ... )

Reviewer: @sgugger told me one shouldn't provide the `num_labels` argument in case you provide `id2label` mappings

Reviewer: Not sure though whether that works

Author: Oh, interesting! I was able to finetune without `num_labels`, but we'll wait for more clarification from Sylvain :)

Reviewer 2: Yes, you don't need to pass `num_labels` if you pass `id2label`, it will just be ignored.

```

<Tip>

If you aren't familiar with finetuning a model with the [`Trainer`], take a look at the basic tutorial [here](../training#finetune-with-trainer)!

</Tip>

> Define your training hyperparameters in [`TrainingArguments`]. It is important you don't remove unused columns because this will drop the `image` column. Without the `image` column, you can't create `pixel_values`. Set `remove_unused_columns=False` to prevent this behavior!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Define your training hyperparameters in [`TrainingArguments`]. It is important that you don't remove unused columns because this will drop the `image` column. Without the `image` column, you can't create `pixel_values`. Set `remove_unused_columns=False` to prevent this behavior!
```

```py
>>> from transformers import TrainingArguments

> >>> training_args = TrainingArguments(

Reviewer: I'd also add push to hub here

...     output_dir="./results",
...     learning_rate=6e-5,
...     num_train_epochs=50,
...     per_device_train_batch_size=2,
...     per_device_eval_batch_size=2,
...     save_total_limit=3,
...     evaluation_strategy="steps",
...     save_strategy="steps",
...     save_steps=20,
...     eval_steps=20,
...     logging_steps=1,
...     eval_accumulation_steps=5,
...     remove_unused_columns=False,
... )
```

> To evaluate model performance during training, you'll need to create a function to compute and report metrics. For semantic segmentation, you'll typically compute the [mean intersection over union](https://huggingface.co/spaces/evaluate-metric/mean_iou) (IoU). The mean IoU measures the overlapping area between the predicted and ground truth segmentation maps. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To evaluate model performance during training, you'll need to create a function to compute and report metrics. For semantic segmentation, you'll typically compute the [mean Intersection over Union](https://huggingface.co/spaces/evaluate-metric/mean_iou) (IoU). The mean IoU measures the overlapping area between the predicted and ground truth segmentation maps. 
```

```py
>>> def train_transforms(example_batch):
...     images = [jitter(x) for x in example_batch["image"]]
...     labels = [x for x in example_batch["annotation"]]
...     inputs = feature_extractor(images, labels)
...     return inputs

>>> def val_transforms(example_batch):
...     images = [x for x in example_batch["image"]]
...     labels = [x for x in example_batch["annotation"]]
...     inputs = feature_extractor(images, labels)
...     return inputs
```

To apply the `jitter` over the entire dataset, use 🤗 Datasets [`~datasets.Dataset.set_transform`] function. The transform is applied on the fly which is faster and consumes less disk space:

```py
>>> train_ds.set_transform(train_transforms)
>>> test_ds.set_transform(val_transforms)
```

## Train

<frameworkcontent>

> <pt>

Reviewer 2: The whole tutorial is PyTorch only (it uses torchvision before), so not sure this is useful here.
